---
layout: distill
title: Experience of music, identity, and anticipation
description: A phenomenological approach to understanding music and our identity
tags: philosophy music phenomenology
giscus_comments: true
date: 2023-08-25
featured: true

authors:
  - name: Apratim Rastogi

toc:
  - name: Introduction
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: Methodology and Approach
  - name: Music and its experience
  - name: Music and Identity
  - name: Identity and Anticipation
  - name: Conclusion
  - name: References


---
## Introduction
It is almost completely unclear why humans have respondence to music built in their systems amidst all other noises in the world. Yet its effect is so profound on humans since the inception of mankind that one can walk on earth and not find a person without it. Music is so deeply ingrained in not only human cultures but in an individual as well that it almost feels personal for individuals. In this essay, I will talk about the experience of music and how it shapes our identities in society. To understand the connection between music and identity, I will define the term “musical identity” and will try to use it to argue that our anticipation of music comes from our musical identity. 

## Methodology and Approach 
The experience of music is not something that can be studied starting from outside one’s mind. So in order to understand the experience of music and how it shapes our identity, I will mostly rely on the phenomenological approach using my experiences as a musician. Though the ideas presented here in the essay are applicable to all kinds of music, I will mostly take a standpoint of instrumental music or “pure music” without vocals. The inclusion of vocals (semantics) will divert us from our central point of concern and will make some things harder to assess. I will also be reflecting on some ideas from the literature in this field.  

## Music and its experience
To understand the experience of music, we must first define what is music and what is not music. Clifton defines music as, “Music is the actualization of the possibility of any sound whatever to present to some human being a meaning which he experiences with his body - that is to say with his mind, his feeling, his sense, his will, and his metabolism.”. The problem with this definition is that it doesn’t take into account the influence caused by the music on one experiencing it. After all the relevance of music is because of its influence on the person experiencing it and not just because of the experience of it. Also, he doesn’t say about the use of music and its subject matters at all. 

I am inclined towards considering music as a channel of communication, for emotions, feelings, intentions, and meanings that may or may not be expressible in natural language. Like every channel of communication, there are some fundamental features associated that make it what it is. These features are the time-space and rhythm. All the other features like harmony, context, intentions, etc, are built on top of these features. Of course, some will argue that there is more to music than just these two things. But I think these two are at the core of what music is both from a compositional and experiential point of view. 
Although I agree with Clifton when he argues, “Order is constituted by the experiencing person, who is just as likely to experience it in a collection of natural sounds, as in improvised music or a finely wrought fugue by J.S. Bach” (Clifton, 1983), I would take his description a step further and emphasize on the fact that for something to be considered music it must have some kind of rhythm to it or some ‘order’ as Clifton likes to put it. And this rhythm need not be objectively defined that is it can also be how one makes out a rhythm of some sounds in his experience. For example, when listening to a piece of music one musician might take the rhythm to be according to the time signature defined in the music, while another musician might hear the songs in terms of small polyrhythms. This is how one can make out rhythms subjectively but the rhythm is necessary and articulation of rhythms in different subtle ways adds to the identity of a musician (more on this in section 4).
The next important thing I meticulously mentioned was the ‘time-space’. The ‘time-space’ is another feature that is arguably most essential to identify something as music. The ‘time-space’ is an experience of a time in a totally different space in our head which is created by the music itself by defining how events (silences and notes) are placed between two points, that is, between the start to end. I want to emphasize that this ‘time-space’ has nothing to do with the metaphysical time of reality outside the music. This ‘time-space’ is an abstract space created in our minds by some of the features which all musician define beforehand explicitly or gets implicitly assigned through their mode of musical expression. The important thing to notice here is that in this abstract time, only the duration of the music is defined, and rest everything inside this duration can change giving a feeling of different speeds of time and thus different sensations. Things like the tempo, time signature of a bar, duration of notes, and polyrhythms define how one experiences music. For example, if one is listening to a ballad classical piece, events will feel very slow, and thus it will feel like time is passing at a much slower pace, while one whose is listening to progressive rock music, he will experience many different time signatures, sometimes there will be lots of events happening at once and other time lots less. The second person will experience ‘time-space’ fluctuating and which has no relation to time outside the music. 
Now since I have laid out what music and its essential components, I can safely move on talking about how music shapes our identity.

## Music and Identity
Identity is metaphysically problematic in philosophy. However, I would restrain myself from going into that domain because that will go out of the scope of this essay. I would rather simply define identity to be a notion by which one gets to know about who the other person is or simply ‘identify’ the person. One develops his identity by absorbing experiences and developing unique characteristics, behaviors, and thought patterns. And to be able to identify someone, one needs to have some acquaintance with these unique characteristics and behaviors of that person for comparison and recognition. These qualities of an individual are a construct of his past subjective experiences, biases, and social background. So, basically, one’s identity is shaped by a certain behavioral pattern that is uniquely ingrained in them because of their unique formation process. The characteristics that are agreeably identifiable in society, constitute our social identity. Similarly, when certain musical characteristics of a musician’s compositional style are agreeably identifiable by listeners and other musicians, constitute their musical identity. 
John Cage who sat silently for exactly four minutes and thirty-three seconds, and called it a piece of music, once said, “everything we do is music”. He is right in making a remark like this because as I would argue, everything one does musically adds to the construct of his musical identity. As previously stated I take my stand music to be a language, I can compare how music just like natural language shapes our identity. Now as a child develops his vocabulary, and use of it over time, a musician (or a listener) also develops a musical inclination over time by hearing different styles of music. The distinction comes from the use of different tonal as well as structural elements of music which corresponds to the linguistic vocabulary and grammar. For example, when one person decides to pick up a guitar and wants to learn it, one starts by learning the basic vocabulary of music theory or notes, then a grammatical structure gives him the ability to arrange these notes to make sensible words called chords. Once he has learned all the basics, he learns the songs he wants to play, and in this way, he picks up musical influence, in the form of learned phrases or licks, chord progressions, etc. This goes on to develop his musical identity. 

So far I have talked about what musical identity is and how it gets built. Now I will talk about what are the constituents of this musical identity. There is a sense of identity attached to a person in the form of his voice, accent, choice of words, and commonly used phrases. Simply by the way of expression that person has. Therefore, any of these characteristics are enough to recognize the person having it. Similar is the case with music. A musician has a musical vocabulary that he uses to express his ideas, communicate feelings, intentions, and influence thought patterns in the person who is experiencing it. The harmonic choices, the styling of phrasing, note choices, note articulation, all add to the musical vocabulary of a musician and serve as a characteristic identity factor as these small details are heard by the one listening. For example, even if the same piece of music is played by two different people one is acquainted with (this is important to be able to recognize), one can generally recognize which is played by whom. This is because of the sense of identity their playing carries and is heard by the one listening to it. 
I have talked about musical identity and how one acquires it. Now in the next section, I will talk about how this musical identity shapes our sense of anticipation. 

## Identity and Anticipation
I have talked about how music shapes our identity in society. In this section, I will talk about the relevance of musical identity for ourselves. This can be divided into the compositional and listener’s point of view. One’s musical identity tells let him be aware of his musical tastes, influences, and enables him to anticipate events in a musical piece. Anticipation is something that is very subtly ingrained in our experience of music yet we are unaware of it. Anticipation is what our mind tries to predict the next event to be in the time-space of a music piece while listening to it or composing one. Anticipation adds to the experience of our music. It lets us make more sense of the rhythm patterns and feeling that a piece of music is trying to convey or what one wants to convey as a musician. At the same time, anticipation can also worsen our experience of music. Anticipation is the combined effect of our feelings at the moment, our musical identity, and the context of music. It is like when we are reading or involved in speech, we find ourselves thinking about the upcoming words or ideas based on our previous knowledge, context, and our feelings about the content. 

First, let us consider the listener’s point of view, one who is listening to a music piece constantly thinking about the next upcoming events of the piece. There is not much to say about anticipation from the listener’s point of view but there are huge implications from a compositional perspective as we will see in a bit. This constant unconscious process of anticipation also causes listeners to find originality in what they take away from the music. For example, one might listen to a piece of music, and while anticipating the next phrase his mind mixes the content of original music with the anticipation of phrasing which might retain with the listener as a new idea. ( this is one of the implications that affects the composition). On the other hand, it can also make the listener lose a bit of intention a piece of music is supposed to convey. In either case, anticipation brings subjectivity to one’s experience of music. 
Now let’s consider the compositional vantage point. From a composer’s point of view, there is always an endless number of possibilities one can take after a note is played but here musical identity plays a huge role. Out of the endless possibilities, the choice made by the composer truly depends on his musical identity. Although, being a composer means you are trained to think so in that case, anticipation comes into play while trying to think out of the box. For example, if a musician decides to grab attention in between the music or convey the sense of strangeness, he will out of the endless possibilities of changing time signatures, using chromatic notes, or using odd polyrhythms, he will anticipate the choice based on his musical identity. 
Although I want to point out that anticipation is a quality that arises from rhythm (one of the essential elements of music) and only the notion of a defined rhythm pattern allows for the possibility of anticipating next events based on the ongoing pattern. By saying that, I made a rather big point in defining music itself. I am suggesting that anticipation is another essential element for something to be called music. This sense of anticipation is what makes sounds different from music in one’s subjective experience of composing music from sounds.

## Conclusion

In this essay, I started by defining music as a language with its essential elements. Then I defined musical identity and how one acquires it. Then I talked about the role of musical identity and finally talked about that musical identity is responsible for our anticipation of music. Anticipation makes our experiences rich or worse but in either case, it is responsible for our subject experience of music. In doing so I finally concluded anticipation is rather an essential element for something in our experience to be called music. 

## References
1. Hargreaves, David & Miell, Dorothy & MACDONALD, RAYMOND. (2002). What are musical identities, and why are they important. Musical Identities. 
2. Clifton, Thomas (1984). Music as Heard: A Study in Applied Phenomenology. _Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism_ 42 (3):1.
3. Kania, Andrew, "The Philosophy of Music", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/entries/music/>.
